Meet Juan Cayul from Chile.
He’s of the Mapuche tribe
—a tribe which has faced
discrimination over the years.
Because of the discrimination,
some may be reluctant to use their language,
Mapudungún, in public.
This became a challenge for Juan,
since he wanted to give
his best in the ministry for Jehovah.
Mapudungún means ‘the speech of my land.’
It’s a beautiful and expressive language,
and it’s the language of my heart.
When I was 12 years old, I went to live
with my grandfather and my uncle’s family
so that I could study at a nearby school.
My cousins spoke Mapudungún a lot,
which made me really happy.
When I saw that some of my classmates
didn’t understand their schoolwork,
especially in math class,
I would try to help them out.
That’s when I started to think about becoming
a math teacher so that I could really help others.
But the head teacher told me
that because I was speaking
Mapudungún and because
I was helping my classmates,
she was going to lower my grades.
When my father saw my grades, he was furious.
He accused me of being lazy and not studying.
He withdrew me from school,
and I went back home to Tromén.
My dream of becoming a teacher
was shattered.
Because my dad had suffered so much
as a victim of discrimination,
he told us that we
were not to speak Mapudungún.
When I think about everything that happened,
it makes me very sad.
Years later, I met Sylvia
who was Mapuche like me.
She proved to be a sensitive and loving person.
We spoke Mapudungún together,
and that helped to relieve the bitterness
I felt in my heart.
Some time later, I learned about someone else
who made me feel loved and valued—Jehovah.
That changed my life.
All my pain disappeared
once I got to know Jehovah.
My wife and I studied the Bible
with the Witnesses in Spanish.
And so when I started to preach and teach,
I used Spanish too.
One day, I was out in service,
and as we approached a house
an elderly Mapuche woman came to the door.
She was scared.
So straight away I greeted her in Mapudungún.
She invited us inside and spoke with us.
That was the first time
I had spoken about Jehovah in my mother tongue.
On our way back, I was deep in thought,
praying to Jehovah
about how to help the Mapuche people.
Many years passed
before I saw an answer to my prayers.
Then one day after the meeting, I received
an invitation to be a speaker at the first assembly
to include talks in Mapudungún.
But I didn’t want to accept the assignment.
I felt worthless because
of all the discrimination I had endured.
So
I prayed again and again to Jehovah
and began to meditate a lot.
Jehovah was now giving me
an answer to my prayers.
He sees our true value.
I was so happy, so very happy.
I understood that Jehovah loved me
and cared for me
and that he would continue to help me.
In just a few years, not one,
but several Mapudungún congregations were formed.
And now my wife and I,
as well as our two children,
serve in Mapudungún-language congregations.
I’ve been assisting with Mapudungún translation
for more than seven years now.
When I tell the brothers and sisters
who work with me at the translation office
about my childhood dream of becoming a teacher,
they tell me, “You’re our teacher now.”
I want to say to my brothers
and sisters around the world:
“Don’t put yourselves down.
“You are precious; you are precious to Jehovah.
He will always help you.”